boards: arm: add the Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express (#62618)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: boards/arm/adafruit_grand_central_m4_express/doc/index.rst

.. _adafruit_grand_central_m4_express:

Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express
#################################

Overview
********

The Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express is an ARM development board with the
form factor of an Arduino Mega.
It features 70 GPIO pins, a microSDHC slot and 8MiB of QSPI Flash.

.. image:: img/adafruit_grand_central_m4_express.jpg
     :align: center

>      :alt: Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     :alt: Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express

     Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express (Credit: XXXX)
```

Reviewer: IANAL but this is basically fair use of the original image, and adding the credit mention is an additional way to make it clear that we are indeed just using the image for illustration purposes, nothing else.

Hardware
********

- ATSAMD51P20A ARM Cortex-M4F processor at 120 MHz
- 1024 KiB of flash memory and 256 KiB of RAM
- 8 MiB of QSPI flash
- A red user LED

> - A RGB "NeoPixel" / WS2812B LED

Author: The thing is that the Neopixel is connected to SERCOM 0 and 2 which are used by the SD card and the Console/UART.
Afaik it wouldn't work with SPI anyway since it is connected to SERCOM pad 2 for both which can't be used as MOSI.

The "worldsemi,ws2812-gpio" driver is apparently hardcoded for nordic chips so it is not an alternative.

Perhaps it could work with "zephyr,spi-bitbang" and "worldsemi,ws2812-spi" drivers but that is a bit of a mess.

Personally I don't need it so I just skipped it.
If it is important to you I can try it with the spi bitbangig driver though.

> - A RGB "NeoPixel" / WS2812B LED

Reviewer: > Personally I don't need it so I just skipped it. If it is important to you I can try it with the spi bitbangig driver though.

No, not that important :) I thought it would be a low hanging fruit, but looks like it's more tricky. I didn't realize the GPIO driver was nordic specific :/

> .. _adafruit_grand_central_m4_express:

Reviewer 2: You are adding a new board. In this case you should squaseh documentation in the previous commit.

Reviewer 2: Ping

Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express
#################################

Overview
********

The Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express is an ARM development board with the
form factor of an Arduino Mega.
It features 70 GPIO pins, a microSDHC slot and 8MiB of QSPI Flash.

.. figure:: img/adafruit_grand_central_m4_express.webp
   :width: 800px
   :align: center
   :alt: Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express

>    Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express (Credit: Kattni Rembor)

Author: hm. The Adafruit Website explicitly names her as the owner though.
I guess it makes sense to add Adafruit, but I don't think it's a good idea to not mention the "owner".

Perhaps something like "(Credit: Kattni Rembor / Adafruit)" ?

>    Adafruit Grand Central M4 Express (Credit: Kattni Rembor)

Reviewer: +1

Connections and IOs
===================

The `Adafruit Learning System`_ has detailed information about
the board including `pinouts`_ and the `schematics`_.

System Clock
============

The SAMD51 MCU is configured to use the 32.768 kHz external oscillator
with the on-chip PLL generating the 120 MHz system clock.

Serial Port
===========

The SAMD51 MCU has 8 SERCOM based UARTs. On the Grand Central, SERCOM0 is
the Zephyr console and is available on RX(PB25) and TX(PB24).

SPI Port
========

The SAMD51 MCU has 8 SERCOM based SPIs. On the Grand Central, SERCOM7 has been
set into SPI mode to connect to devices over the SCK(PD09), MOSI(PD08), and MISO(PD11) pins.
Additionally SERCOM2 has been configured as SPI to access the microSDHC card.

I2C Port
========

The SAMD51 MCU has 8 SERCOM based I2Cs. On the Grand Central, SERCOM3 has been
configured as I2C to connect to devices over the SCL(PB21) and SDA(PB20) pins.

USB Device Port
===============

The SAMD51 MCU has a USB device port that can be used to communicate
with a host PC.  See the :ref:`usb-samples` sample applications for

> more, such as the :ref:`usb_cdc-acm` sample which sets up a virtual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more, such as the :zephyr:code-sample:`usb-cdc-acm` sample which sets up a virtual
```

Author: When I took this from the other examples, this role wasn't used there.
But if this is the right way I'll change that.

Once there is a review of the device tree, I will add all this small stuff as well.

   host.  See the `Serial Port`_ section above for the board's pin
   connections.

#. Run your favorite terminal program to listen for output. Under Linux the
   terminal should be :code:`/dev/ttyUSB0`. For example:

   .. code-block:: console

      $ minicom -D /dev/ttyUSB0 -o

   The -o option tells minicom not to send the modem initialization
   string. Connection should be configured as follows:

   - Speed: 115200
   - Data: 8 bits
   - Parity: None
   - Stop bits: 1

#. Tap the reset button twice quickly to enter bootloader mode

#. Flash the image:

   .. zephyr-app-commands::
      :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
      :board: adafruit_grand_central_m4_express
      :goals: flash
      :compact:

   You should see "Hello World! adafruit_grand_central_m4_express" in your terminal.

Debugging
=========

In addition to the built-in bootloader, the Grand Central can be flashed and
debugged using a SWD probe such as the Segger J-Link.

#. Connect the probe to the board using the 10-pin SWD interface.

#. Flash the image:

   .. zephyr-app-commands::
      :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
      :board: adafruit_grand_central_m4_express

>       :goals: flash -r openocd

Reviewer: Damn, just noticed this one, I'm sorry:-(
It needs to be updated like this https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/64176/commits/897639db836ad775365f65d0cc042e564912ca6d
The rendered command is incorrect otherwise

![Screenshot_20231201-085006.png](https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/assets/128251/5140244b-6ae7-4c71-8344-7c567a8b675f)
